I actually think one
of the reasons why
some of these universities
have made changes
without provocation from
the Trump administration
is because they wanted
to. They wanted to
and they thought that
this was a good thing,
and they were tired
of being held hostage
by their left wing.
Right now, people are arguing about
whether cancel culture is back
and this time, coming
from the right.
And it certainly looks
like the suspension
of Jimmy Kimmel and
other controversies
do represent a kind of
conservative revenge
for the great woke
cancellations of 2020
and 2021.
But I really think
that you need
to understand the conservative
cultural strategy right
now, much more in terms of
institutions than celebrity
individuals.
"They care more
about identity politics.
They care more about
diversity, equity,
and inclusion."
Long before the Charlie
Kirk assassination,
the Trump White House saw
a once-in-a-generation
opportunity to try and
push America’s cultural
institutions, movie studios
and TV networks meaningfully
to the right.
"Well, we want the museums
to treat our country fairly.
We want the museums to
talk about the history
of our country in a fair
manner, not in a woke manner
or in a racist manner."
This week, I want to talk
about the most significant
of these efforts,
more important even
than the late night TV wars.
And that’s the
administration’s attempts
to change elite academia.
"They want to directly review
who we hire on our faculty."
"I mean, this is about science.
It’s about curing cancer."
"I don’t think that we should
believe any of these people
are interested in good
faith reforms of how higher
education works."
My guest this
week, May Mailman,
is the perfect person to
discuss the Trump White
House’s higher education
strategy, because she’s been
the person in charge of it.
So May Mailman, welcome
to Interesting Times.
Thanks for having me.
So I just want to start with
a very, very big picture
question.
Tell me: what is wrong with
the American University?
Yeah, and I don’t think
it’s every university,
but I would say in general —
you’ve got a lot of different
problems.
And the biggest one
that comes for me
is a culture of victimhood,
a glorification of victimhood
that is ultimately bad
for Western civilization
and bad for the country.
And I think you can notice it
in little pieces, like when Justice
Kavanaugh was going through
his confirmation hearings,
the need for
grievance sessions,
the need for coloring books,
the amount of emotional
support people needed to
suffer through Trump’s
electoral victory.
And I think that there’s this
culture that universities have
been perpetuating.
Maybe — I call it
Meghan Markle syndrome as well —
where the greatest
good, the greatest height
that you can be is a victim.
So I think that’s one thing.
And I think then pieces
of it trickle down
to racism and admissions,
racism in hiring. You're hiring
people to do things based
on their identity rather
than their ability.
But I think at the
end of the day,
it all boils down to a
glorification of victimhood.
What do universities
teach their students
that they are victims
of in your view?
Yeah, and so it’s not
necessarily that they are
victims, but that they
should be victims.
That it’s good to be a
victim. That in admissions,
what is it better to be?
It’s better to be
in a minority class,
whether that’s a sexual
minority class or that’s
a racial minority class.
There’s something better
to being underrepresented,
to being somehow downtrodden
that should be treated
as preferential or better.
And that type of behavior
is not only illegal
right? Which is can’t
treat people differently
on the basis of their race,
but it’s harmful for so many
reasons beyond that.
You just want the best people,
no matter what they look like.
The type of students
that you want,
you obviously want diversity.
And I think Justice Thomas,
when he’s talking about this —
he’s in favor of
diversity, not aesthetics —
but the whole idea of treating
people differently based
on whether they are
oppressed or oppressors...
And if it’s seen
as Meghan Markle—
why does she want to
appear like a victim?
Because then she’s special.
There’s something good about
the queen not liking you
because you can
then be a victim.
And that—
I’m not sure it’s worked out
actually that well for her.
She has a TV show.
She does, she does.
She does have a TV show.
I don’t have a TV show.
Not yet.
But then, so you just mentioned that it’s
reasonable for universities
to want diversity, right?
And so, I think an argument
is obvious argument that
a university might make in
thinking about how these
issues impact admissions
is to say: Well,
obviously if you’re trying to
have a diverse student body,
you do to some extent want to
look at the actual experiences
people have. Right?
And if someone has been
victimized in some way by some
set of forces in their life —
material, financial, familial,
whatever, racism included,
let’s call it adversity.
Can you rule out adversity
entirely as a reason to maybe
give someone a
kind of preference?
So I think experience
is obviously relevant.
Maybe a 3.8
student body president
is a better applicant than 4.0
video game basement dweller.
So I think it’s perfectly
fine, obviously,
to take into
account experience,
and it does create a much
better student body than if it
was just totally blind
based on your SAT score.
But I think the question
is, what you’re celebrating.
Are you celebrating
the fact that this
is somebody with nothing.
Or are you
celebrating the fact
that this is someone who has
shown that with nothing, they
can be somebody.
But so at bottom, your
argument is that what
universities are failing to
do is adequately reward merit,
whether in their applicant
pool or in who they’re hiring
to get on the tenure track,
do research and so on.
And in many ways,
fail to reward merit
in ways that are illegal and
violate our civil rights laws.
So the failure to
reward merit is,
I think, not only just a
problem with the universities,
but it is then therefore
relevant for its relationship
with the federal government.
And you said at
the start that,
it’s not every American
University that has these
problems.
Talk a little bit about
your own experience.
So you went to a
red or reddish.
Kansas is sometimes
politically complicated
but a reddish state flagship
University for undergrad.
And then you went to a school
in Cambridge, Massachusetts
of some note for
law school, right.
So you had two kind of
distinct experiences
of different forms of
elite education in America.
I’m curious both whether you
saw the problems that you
think the Trump administration
is fighting at work in those
places.
And also, if you
felt like there
was a big difference
between Kansas and Harvard.
Yeah, I would
say my experience
at the University of Kansas,
I felt more a diverse student.
Kansas is not it’s a white.
It’s a fairly white state.
I think we can say that I’ve
noticed that on my visits.
And so I participated on
the multicultural board
my freshman year,
which is this.
Anybody can come and talk
about your experiences
and what needs to change.
And everything.
My sorority that I was a part
of sororities and fraternities
pair with each other
for all these events,
and I wanted to pair with a
black fraternity associations
rather than just the
traditional IFC fraternities.
So I really like, I think,
identified or felt like I was.
I don’t a diverse person and
I really wanted to think about
those issues and pay attention
to them in ways not like
victimhood necessarily, but
cohesiveness and bringing
everybody together.
And then I did teach for
America just to locate us.
When were you an undergrad.
So I graduated in 2010.
O.K before, some of the
larger racial issues.
So my last year in law school,
which was the Ferguson,
Missouri, and
you had hands up,
don’t shoot riots all the
way around the country.
And I went to a few of
the Ferguson die ins
just to walk around and
see what people were doing.
And it was a bunch
of professors,
and it was a
bunch of students,
and nobody did anything crazy.
They just went to the middle
of a road and laid down,
and there was a
community feeling to it.
And there was something
about chanting
with all of your friends.
The same thing.
No justice.
No no peace.
No racist police.
That felt communal and
maybe you weren’t achieving
anything, but you were
doing it with your friends.
And as the president of
the Federalist Society,
I felt a little
bit of pressure,
I think, to have
a position on what
I thought about all
these things going on
in the country.
And were you and did
you think of yourself
as a political conservative or
a Republican through all this
when you were in
college and afterward.
Yeah, I definitely saw
myself as a conservative,
which I think made
me way more attracted
to the Trump movement than I
did a traditional Republican.
And I don’t exactly
know why that is.
I think it’s just growing
up in the middle of nowhere,
you don’t there’s no where
did you where did you grow up
on the Kansas Colorado
border is a small town called
goodland that is, in fact,
the middle of nowhere.
It actually is
not no judgment.
But it is.
It is actually.
Yes, definitely.
Statistically Yes, Yes.
Yeah, it was definitely
conservative,
but kind of weighing
in on societal issues,
especially on some of these
really tough ones was a tough
spot for me because why
can’t we all just get along
as a wise man once said.
So Well, I mean, I’m
interested in this
because when we’re going to
get into the actual things
that the Trump administration
is asking of universities
in just a second.
But one thing that’s striking
about the argument about
universities is
obviously, in a way,
it’s one that’s been going on
since William F Buckley first
emerged on the political scene
and wrote God and man at Yale.
The conservative argument that
campuses are too liberal, too
ideologically conformist
that they reward
victimhood over merit, that
they use affirmative action
in discriminatory ways.
These are arguments that
are decades and decades old.
But there’s a clear sense,
both among conservatives
and some liberals, that
something substantially
changed in the
middle of the 2010s.
That took all of
these existing things
that conservatives complained
about and just made
them much worse.
And it seems like
that’s what you think.
I’m curious why you think that
happened and how much worse it
got.
Yeah the why.
And maybe everyone was
already this liberal.
And I think people,
smarter people than me,
have blamed social
media and the iPhone.
You found your community
in Facebook groups
over campus groups, and you
were able to retreat and hold
your positions more closely.
I buy into that.
But I think there and I think
the shutting down of speech.
So what we used to call
political correctness
and now call wokism.
And I felt that.
So this was
Obergefell decision
was right after my third
year of law school.
And this was the same sex
marriage, the same sex
marriage decision.
And most people that
are young and educated
are in favor of gay marriage
in some way, shape, or form.
But you could
always talk about it
in some way, what about
this and that and talking,
and I felt like the
speech each element where
all of a sudden now.
Oh, I’m sorry, you said
traditional marriage.
What do you mean by that.
What does that mean.
And as the speech got more
constrained than the ideas
had to be pushed
aside a little bit.
And actually,
people at Harvard
will say currently
that some of that
had to do also with the
rise of social media
because you could be
shamed a little bit easier.
So I got in trouble.
One day at Harvard because
I had an event with Chick
fil A sandwiches.
And the Chick fil A people
left their hot bag that you
put all the sandwiches in.
And so I threw it in a room
with all of the student groups
lockers.
And somehow this bag was
in front of the gay student
groups locker.
And so there was a group
chat going around saying that
the Federalist Society is
trying to basically threaten
the gay student group because
there was this chick fil A bag
saying, no, that
didn’t happen.
But the same type of discourse
that might have previously
happened or benefit of the
doubt or conversation now is
much easier for them to
go to their group and say,
I’ve been discriminated
against and then actually have
a conversation, and
that got cleared up.
But I do think
this shift, which
involved both a curtailing
of speech and retreat
to groups online,
does have a lot
to do with iPhones,
social media and the way
that we communicate.
And what about
protest culture.
You clearly had, in the mid
2010s, the rise of a general,
a general new atmosphere of
protest culture on campuses.
And part of the argument
from the Trump administration
has been that this
led to a culture
of overt physical intimidation
for Jewish students,
in particular, when
the protests were
around issues related to
Israel and Gaza and so on.
But just I think generally
that protest became a means
of intimidating speech.
So I somewhat attribute the
rise of this protest culture,
which I will agree did occur
around then to the same
actually underlying cause
that I just mentioned
of people retreating online.
As people get lonelier,
they want to find groups.
So the George Floyd protest,
when everybody was locked down
and no one could do anything
and you couldn’t see anything,
and here’s this community.
I mean, it was a community.
It’s your buddies,
it’s your friends.
And I can’t actually
fault that feeling.
That’s a very human feeling
that you want to be a part of.
And then, especially if you
lose a friend group and you
lose some of the things that
you otherwise would have done,
then Yeah, protests
seem very attractive.
Tractive so I want to be
concrete because we’re going
to talk about the
universities as institutions,
because that is obviously
where law and policy come in.
What you’re describing is
a cultural shift, right.
How is it the responsibility
or to what extent
is it the responsibility of
universities as institutions
to have some kind of reaction.
Like, it’s not the
universities fault that all
their students were
on iPhones, right.
And it’s not the universities
fault that students started
protesting and so on.
What did the institutions
themselves, in your view,
do wrong in response
to this shift
towards political conformism,
protest culture and so on.
So I think the
universities were too late.
So on just basic
safety issues.
So let’s just take the post.
October 7.
Anti-Semitic asymmetric,
violent episodes breaking out
across college campuses.
If you’re letting a Tent
cities fester on your campus.
And then we’ve heard a lot
from Harvard specifically that
they were concerned about
shutting some of those down
or citing students because you
can’t just say, hey, leave.
The students aren’t
going to leave.
There has to be lever, I’m
going to suspend you or I’m
going to write you up, or
there’s going to be some
consequences here.
But if you’ve got a bunch
of international students
and such a thing might
threaten their visa,
then you’re not
going to do that.
So I think there was fear.
Discipline discipline
would threaten discipline.
Yeah Yep.
So I think there was too much
fear from University officials
that by taking basic safety
measures that somehow that
would reflect badly on
them, and they were scared
because they didn’t
want to be criticized.
And I think there has been
some learning on that of like,
no, we’re going to
protect our students.
And I think universally
people learn some lessons
after October 7 and
University presidents were
fired and replaced, including
at Harvard, at Penn, Columbia.
But in general, what should
they be doing about this.
I think it’s just buying into
the notion that there has
to be some community aspect
that’s continually fostered
around a culture
of excellence.
Otherwise, you
will let a culture
of victimhood and intimidation
and harassment and negativity
thrive.
And I think recognizing
that there was a problem,
which I don’t think
they still have done,
but that’s an opportunity
that just has not been seized.
So just for maximum clarity.
So then you have
a problem that
is in part about
a set of ideas
having to do with the value
of victimhood that undermine
the academic and professional
mission of the universities.
You have that, and then
you have concrete failures
to provide basic
public safety.
Is that a fair.
That’s a fair distillation.
Yes O.K, good.
So let’s now let’s talk about
what the Trump administration
is trying to do about it.
So why don’t you
describe for me,
from your perspective as
the point person for this
strategy, how the Trump
administration has thought
about its conflicts with
universities and its attempts
to of attack both
of those problems.
So I think day one or day 2
is an executive order that
discusses universities
specifically.
Title Vi says that for any
federally funded educational
institution that they can’t
discriminate on the basis
of race or national origin.
And so this has been used
both on the anti-Semitism
front, which is national
origin and race,
and then also on what I people
broadly describe as die front.
And so if you’re going
to be federally funded,
then we’re going to make sure
that you don’t discriminate
on the basis of race.
So it started with
investigations
sending letters.
And I think some people
just changed their policies
at the beginning.
So pause there for a moment.
So you how did
you first of all,
how did you pick which
schools you sent letters to.
So I think the
Department of Education.
We primarily relied on
to pick what they either
knew based on complaints
that had been received.
And you had House
investigations.
So a lot of this
information was public here
and there was in
government databases.
Some of them are just very
out loud the Uc system.
So I think there
was some flag waving
by certain universities.
And then I think where
they would basically say,
we’re primarily hiring
minorities for these
positions.
Exactly that kind of thing.
Yes just give me an example.
Let’s just take
Harvard, for example.
Harvard has since taken
down its statistics,
but they used to
have a big comparison
chart of what their new
hires used to look like
and what their
hires looked like.
I don’t three years ago,
something like that.
And it used to be pretty
heavily white male.
And then now it’s not.
And then they
deleted that website.
So you have all of the pieces
where it’s like an overt focus
on this where we want, we
absolutely want to lower
our white males.
And then there’s an
embarrassment piece of it
where they then
took the thing down.
So that’s what I would
consider flag waving.
So the Trump administration
has lots of data and you can’t
do everything all at once.
And so there is a
prioritization issue.
And I think people have picked
up that the Ivy League has
been prioritized, which
they’re not the only ones.
But when you’re thinking about
what the consequences are
if you are violating Title
Vi or just otherwise have bad
policies, the federal
government doesn’t have
to give you grants.
But is there also a sense
in which the Ivy League sets
the tone for elite education.
And if you effectively make
an example of these schools,
you would assume that other
schools will fall into line.
Is that part of it, too.
So you want leadership
but leadership
in the right direction.
So I think that’s actually
something that Harvard would
agree with if you
were to ask Harvard,
what makes Harvard Harvard.
Why is it special.
Why don’t you just shut
Harvard down, not have it,
but you can have all the
rest of the Ivies and will
the world be the same.
And Harvard would say, no, the
world would not be the same.
We must have Harvard.
Why is that.
Because they’re leaders.
Like they I mean, also, the
federal government doesn’t
actually have the power to
shut down Harvard University.
But I would just
in theory, defund.
You can defund Harvard.
What’s Harvard’s
special thing.
right.
And it is that in
theory, a leader.
And the question is a
leader in what direction.
And so if you get signals from
the heights of the leaders
in academia that we’re making
these changes, then Yes,
that’s obviously hugely
influential for the rest
of the country.
So what are schools
supposed to do
to prove to the
Trump administration
that they are being good
examples for the rest
of higher education.
So we actually do plan to have
a formal way that universities
can say we’re doing
the right things.
So I think the Trump
administration does not
want to be all whack-a-mole
or all negative,
but these are the
principles that universities
and the Trump administration
and frankly, private donors
can ascribe to say this
makes a great University.
So those have not been public
yet, but they will be public.
And I think we’re going
to have a lot of great
universities signing up as
the forerunners and saying we
affirm these things, but
nothing will be shocking.
It will be things like
merit based admissions,
merit based hiring.
I think we’d also to see
some attention to the cost
of admissions.
So things that are going
to just vary directly
benefit students.
Some look at what your foreign
student base looks like.
Are you importing
radicalism and how
are you assessing that.
So a commitment to cleaning
that up foreign funding.
Is that primarily about
the ideology of students
admitted or is it a
problem with the numbers.
Like does the Trump
administration
have a problem with how
many foreign students elite
universities admit.
So I think there’s a fairness
issue that the president has
talked about with the numbers.
These are
universities that have
huge amounts of
federal funding
and are supposed to
serve American students.
And instead, they’ve taken
on I think Columbia’s numbers
were close to percent.
Harvard’s are around 30
percent of foreign students.
And that’s not to say anything
bad about foreign students.
It’s about what are the
opportunities remaining
for American students.
So Yes, I think there will be
some focus on what’s the right
sizing there.
And as a University, are you
relying on foreign students
for money or is your
number calculated to having
a good student experience.
And what I think about with
the foreign exchange program
is that this was supposed to
be a program where students
come.
It’s an exchange program.
You come to the United States,
you learn about the United
States, you learn
about the US culture,
and then you take everything
that you’ve learned about how
great our country is, and you
go back to your home country
and you spread those ideas.
And instead, if you have
so large of a number,
then you don’t get that.
You don’t really understand
because the percentages have
grown so much that you can
actually just end up having
your own siloed culture.
How qualified is the
federal government,
whether it be the White
House, the education
department and any
other unit to assess
some of these things.
So I think you would concede
that it is already tricky
to some degree, to assess
how fully in compliance
a University is just with the
Supreme Court’s admissions
decision.
I mean, just a minute
ago, you said, well,
we wouldn’t want universities
to just use SAT scores
to admit kids.
But it seems like if you
wanted to have a system where
you could rigorously assess
racial discrimination
in admissions, aren’t there
just endless gray areas where
it’s just going to be really
hard to say who’s complying
and who’s not.
So definitely,
and I think nobody
in the Trump administration
is trying to run a University.
It is too taxing.
And nobody actually wants
to run a University.
Nobody ever.
Yes so I think there’s a
line of how do you ensure
compliance with civil rights.
And that your
taxpayer money is
going to a good place versus
a bad place, which is broader
than a civil rights question.
So you need some
level of control.
But at the end of the day,
you want independent entities.
Like on one hand, there’s
just the Hillsdale model.
Like if you’re going to
take the money then Yeah,
there’s going to be
strings attached.
But you don’t have
to take the money.
And if your research
was Hillsdale College,
just so listeners is the
conservative liberal arts
school in Michigan one of a
few schools that doesn’t take
federal funding.
right.
And so that’s
always an option.
Like if anybody thinks that
any of this is too burdensome,
especially very
well-funded universities,
then just do none of it.
Just be Hillsdale.
And it’s funny, because
for research, I mean,
people don’t really understand
the massive amount of money
that goes to research.
There’s billions and billions
like Harvard right now,
I think has something like $7
billion of promised grants.
These are huge, huge numbers.
But if all of the
research was good,
if these were research that
was going to create something
that was going to cure
cancer, then a donor
would love to fund that.
I mean, to be the person
that cured cancer.
And so.
Well, wait, wait
a minute, though.
I mean, everybody
wants to cure cancer.
But donors have
finite resources.
One of the assumptions behind
public funding of universities
is that there are
certain goods,
including medical
research and research,
for all kinds of
different diseases,
that you can’t just rely
on donor funding for.
And that has been
the theory behind
public private partnerships
in American life going back
decades.
Do you think that’s good.
Like do you think that.
Do you think the federal
government should
be funding cancer research.
Absolutely O.K. So it’s not
just like donors will pick up
the Slack.
There is good research that
we want the government funded.
There is good research.
But your same question of
how closely can you actually
monitor a university’s
ability to just do a good job,
be merit based, have not be
importing radicalism like
these are difficult questions.
How are you going
to assess that.
It’s the same question,
frankly, for all these grants,
how are you actually going to
monitor where this is being
used, what the types
of research are,
how great the overhead when
you do have the overhead,
is it going to the sports
stadium or is it going
to salaries.
If it’s going to salaries
who’s these gets a bit
difficult questions.
And so I think the problem
is not whether the government
should or shouldn’t be
funding cancer research.
It absolutely should.
But the unwieldiness of
it has led to basically
an unchecked situation.
And so I think it is actually
proper to have a right sizing
where universities are relying
on the federal government
to a certain extent, where
these are things that
are maybe not close
to a breakthrough,
and that there
is an opportunity
for the private sector to
spend money in ways that
are beneficial to society.
And to the extent people have
problems with billionaires
buying an extra jet
or an extra yacht,
what are we doing to
incentivize people to actually
spend on beneficial causes.
So in effect here, you’re
saying basically that.
Harvard is very good
at getting billionaires
to give it money.
And you’re saying if some of
Harvard’s research funding is
threatened, then it’s
not a bad thing at all.
If Harvard calls up its
billionaire donors and says,
hey, we don’t like what the
federal government is asking
of us.
We want you to fund this
cancer research instead.
You’d say, that’s fine.
Wealthy people funding
universities, funding, science
funding.
Our future is
something that has
no history in this country.
It’s absolutely a good thing.
But I’m just the reason I’m
asking about the difficulty
of assessing these things is
not because you have to have
a perfect system.
In order to have a federal
relationship to universities.
It’s more just that you guys
are involved in negotiations,
specific negotiations with
universities that have
concrete asks.
And so I’m just trying
to understand how you get
to the concrete ask.
One aspect of this is that
the Trump administration has
been asking, and in some
cases has successfully
induced elite schools to
pay pretty big settlements
fines effectively to
the federal government.
How does that fit
into the picture.
Is this just punishment.
Is it revenue for the
federal government.
What is the purpose of
those kind of settlements.
So these are large numbers.
And so not to minimize that.
But the Brown settlement and
the Columbia settlement each
represented 1 percent
of the endowment.
So these are things that
the universities can afford.
And in a sense, it’s
giving back a very,
very small percentage of money
that goes to these schools
every year.
So I think there’s a
recognition, of course,
there’s no recognition of
fault. These are settlements.
But by paying
some of this back,
I think there is a somewhat
for the public sense
of acknowledgment of
wrongdoing, not a legal sense,
but a mortal sense of we’ve
taken all this money and we
did it in ways that were not
merit based or they weren’t
safe for our students.
And so we’re paying a
small amount of it back.
But then I think also
having that dollar figure,
It actually brings attention
to the deals in ways people
might not otherwise
pay attention.
So if you see a headline and
it’s Columbia spends $200
million to the Treasury
in $21 million,
largest ever EEOC religious
discrimination case.
Actually, when you
see numbers like that,
then you pay attention and
you look and then you’re able
to learn a little bit more.
So maybe you wouldn’t
normally learn.
And are the people paying
attention, not just
the public, but other
college presidents.
Yeah you want to
get in early before
the fines are too large.
But I think in general,
a settlement on its own
without a fine might not
be taken as seriously
by the public or by
other universities
as when there is a
fine, which I said,
these are small dollar
figures compared
to the amounts that
they are getting
every year from the
federal government
and from their donors.
But I think it provides
a seriousness and a focus
on these in ways that a
promises only wouldn’t.
Do you think the biggest
schools are just too rich.
The federal government
now under the first Trump
administration, passed a
very modest endowment tax.
Do you think generally
it would be better
for America if the
biggest schools had
smaller endowments.
So I think it’s not
necessarily the size
of the endowment.
It’s the application of them.
So are you putting
your endowment
to some positive use, or is
this just generating capital
so that later.
You can have a
bigger building.
There’s no problem
with being wealthy.
There’s no problem with
universities being wealthy.
But what are you
using your wealth for.
I think you can judge on that.
And, so if you’re saying I
need all this money for this
research, where am
I going to find it.
Where am I going.
Well, I did find some of it.
And then if you were
using some of that money
to fund research, that
would generate a patent that
would be very
valuable, then that
would be beneficial
for everybody
because you have
put that money then
to good and productive use.
I want to ask how
ideas, ideology
and ideological diversity
enter into this.
Because in one of the
publicized letters
that the administration
sent to Harvard,
there was a specific
focus on the idea
that Harvard should be looking
for intellectual diversity
in hiring and considering
seriously why there are so few
conservative and
Republican faculty
and trying to do
something about that.
And the letter took
this quite far right.
It specifically said that
Harvard should consider
that each department
field or teaching
unit must be individually
viewpoint diverse.
I’m quoting from
the letter here,
and that there should be a
audit that goes on a quote,
Department by department,
field by field or teaching
unit by teaching unit
basis as appropriate.
End quote.
And I should stress, this is
an area that as a conservative
with a lot of experience
of higher education,
take very seriously as a big
problem for elite academia
that it isn’t
intellectually diverse.
But it does seem like in this
ask can see the problem with
the federal government trying
to micromanage this because it
just seems like you get
very quickly into an absurd
situation where
someone in Washington,
DC is scrutinizing Harvard’s
geology department.
I don’t even know if Harvard
has a geology department,
but you take my point to
see if it has enough Trump
supporters.
This is, I think, the
most difficult question,
because the answer
is on one hand,
obviously, I think
conservatives
want universities to a prepare
their students and students
are going to be in the
real world confronted
with all sorts of
thoughts, and they
should be prepared for that.
So a good University
would have some level
of intellectual diversity.
And not only that, but to the
extent you have universities
that are just hotbeds
of radicalism,
that’s not good
for the student.
That’s not good
for the culture,
that’s not good
for the campus,
that’s bad for the country.
So that is all true.
And I think the
administration believes
that intellectual
diversity is a key factor
to a good University that
we would send our kids to.
But at the same time, I
think we all acknowledge that
the federal government’s
role in policing that is
necessarily limited in the
sense that we don’t want
the next administration
to come in and say, well,
actually, this is the mix
that I think is the best.
So in meaning a Democratic
administration coming
in and calling up University
of Kansas and saying,
why haven’t you hired 17 more
leftists for EECS department.
Exactly and it’s a ridiculous
thing to think through,
because how many more
leftists can you possibly hire
if you’re this
saturated already but.
Well, but it is.
I think that particular
example would not happen.
But I think obviously, we saw
in the Obama administration
and to some degree in the
Biden administration, right.
Democratic administrations
were very comfortable
using some of the same levers
the Trump administration is
using to push college campuses
in particular directions
on how to handle
sexual assault
and how to handle transgender
issues, and so on.
And I think one of the
critiques from a libertarian
perspective of what the
Trump administration is doing
is that you are of setting
up, taking that model
and turbocharging it.
And a Democratic
administration could say, hey,
all of these Catholic
hospitals seem to be getting
a lot of public
health care funding,
and yet they won’t perform
gender reassignment surgeries.
Let’s do something about
that escalatory spiral once
the federal government is
providing private institutions
that get public money
with marching orders.
I think that’s a
reasonable concern.
So civil rights, I think,
is easy meritocracy is good.
And the hope actually is that
if you are actually treating
people on the basis of their
merit and whether that’s test
scores or whether that’s
personal successes
or whatever, you do tend
to handle the intellectual
diversity piece by accident,
because it’s not going to be
the case that every excellent
person thinks the same thing.
So there’s that.
But then also, I think that’s
why it’s important that this
process come under way, where
there’s a conversation with
universities and with
donors and with the Trump
administration altogether,
about what it actually means
to be a great University
and to have buy in.
Because I actually
think one of the reasons
why some of these
universities have made changes
without provocation from
the Trump administration,
or in the case of
Columbia, even though there
was provocation and even
though it was a deal,
is because they wanted
to they wanted to
and they thought that
this was a good thing,
and they were tired
of being held hostage
by their left wing.
And actually, they want
intellectual diversity.
They don’t want another person
who’s just going to have
the same we got another
climate change person,
we’ve got another
gender studies person.
I think they want it.
And so giving the universities
the permission to do this
sometimes requires a strong
statement from the government
that’s almost
like a scapegoat.
But yeah, I think
that’s right.
Based just based on my own
experience living in a college
town and speaking to people
who work in higher education,
that there is
some degree first,
to which the Trump
administration is pushing
on an open door, and also
some degree to which leaders
of universities are
happy to say oh,
we didn’t want to do this, but
the Trump administration made
us do it right.
But in fact, it’s something
that they themselves want
to do.
At the same time,
though, I do think
that there is some
tension between saying,
we want schools to hire
just based on merit,
and we want schools to have
a lot more intellectual
diversity, because the
reality is and this
is where I think the
traditional left wing
argument around
affirmative action
always made a certain sense.
You have to create
pipelines, right.
I think it was reasonable in
the 1960s to say there just
aren’t good pipelines
for getting a lot
of African-American kids
into elite colleges.
I think it’s reasonable for
conservatives today to say
there aren’t good pipelines
for getting people who aren’t
left wing into certain
academic departments.
But I just think you aren’t
going to get there by saying
merit alone.
You are.
You would have to say no.
Universities have to do
proactive things that
are Yeah, going to be
in tension a little bit.
The affirmative action for the
conservative is it’s an actual
reality.
When I was in Harvard there,
we had maybe 1 and 1/2
conservative professors and
I think the University surely
Adrian Vermeule counts
for at least like 3.7.
That is true.
But the pipelines
thing, I think,
is different than actual
affirmative action.
And looking at
your criteria too.
So if what you are
prioritizing is how many times
you’ve been published in
some leftist magazine, then,
of course, a conservative is
not going to compete there.
But I think other universities
have found successes
in having some
adjunct programs.
You’re not a professor.
You’re not going to be able
to compete on those levels.
But we’re going to bring you
in and you can teach a January
course, or you can have a
clinic or something like that.
So I think this problem starts
incrementally solving itself
in a way that doesn’t
ultimately require affirmative
action, and then groups
like the Federalist Society.
They try and
identify people who
they think would
be good professors
and try and teach
them how to do that.
No, no, I don’t think there’s
any problem with the pipeline
in law schools, but I think
the Federalist Society is
a fairly distinctive case.
And let me throw out another
seeming tension here,
which is around issues
about anti-Semitism.
So, clearly there
are certain things
that universities have
tolerated or allowed
in protests in
the last few years
that are just overt
harassment and intimidation
of Jewish students.
And I think there it’s
very straightforward.
What the administration
is asking for.
But then there’s a larger,
very blurry zone of critiques
of the policies of
the state of Israel.
Critiques of Zionism.
Where the administration
has seemed
to ask in some cases
for something that,
again, looks more
like micromanaging
of particular departments.
Saying, well, we’re not
going to have radical critics
of Israel here and there.
And so on.
And that, again, seems
like a kind of thumb
on the scale in
intellectual debates.
So when you say the Trump
administration has asked
for them, I acknowledge that
there are some letters that
were sent by the anti-Semitism
task force in some way
that either incorporated
the IHRA definition
or otherwise were perceived
to have been speech codes.
These are right.
These are strong
definitions of anti-Semitism
that at least some people on
the left would say rule out
what should be legitimate
critiques of right.
But when you look at
what President Trump
and at the Sr. level, what
has actually happened.
It’s not that.
So the Columbia
deal, and I think
everyone would
acknowledge that Columbia
had a major
anti-Semitism problem,
but the Columbia
deal in no way
creates any speech
code, whether it be
on Israel or anything else.
It does not.
It specifically says that this
is not intended to create any
First Amendment conflict
or otherwise govern speech
on Columbia’s campus.
So there’s a concern and
I think there are people
in the administration who
probably are more in favor
of speech constraints and then
people who are less in favor
of speech constraints.
And that’s just the way the
Trump administration works,
where people have different
views of where that line is.
And I think it’s a difficult
conversation of what’s
the line between harassment
and being unable to actually
function on campus, right
versus fair criticism that
people, even if they don’t
like it, should hear it.
That’s not a definable line.
That is a difficult line.
And I think in
sussing that out,
at the end of the day, where
the Trump administration
landed is on the more free
speech side of things,
which is evident in the final
terms of the Columbia deal.
O.K, let’s talk for a
minute about the legality
of the approach the Trump
administration has taken.
Because I think you have
conceded to some degree
that, in all of these
zones, there are
gray areas and blurry lines.
However, the administration
has also moved preemptively
to cut funding to say, it is
and correct me if I’m wrong,
but my understanding is what
has happened repeatedly is
critiques have been lodged,
investigations have been
opened, and then funding
has been cut before
the investigation is complete.
And this is where the
Trump administration
has been rebuked in
court in, most recently
in a case involving Harvard
itself for this right that you
are essentially
assuming the violation
before the negotiation
is actually finished.
Is that a fair critique
So that is certainly
what Harvard says.
Yes, and I think.
It’s different
than that though.
So Yes, Title Vi, which
says you can’t discriminate
on the basis of race,
is a bar on funding.
So if you are found
to violate Title Vi,
that’s not grants
that are at issue.
That’s your student loans.
That’s Pell grants.
I mean, that’s a big deal.
If you are found, if you
are violated right now, what
the Trump
administration has done
is not find a
Title Vi violation
prior to the process.
I mean, the Title Vi
violation was found.
HHS did find them in
violation of Title Vi,
and referred that
case over to DOJ
to litigate and informed
the accreditor for Harvard.
But this is an entity that
doesn’t have share the values,
basically of the
administration.
And there are various statutes
and various regulations
that give the administration
that discretion over how
it can spend its own money.
And so the lawsuit basically
was an argument that oh, well,
they’re just saying that, but
what they’re actually doing is
short circuiting the
Title Vi process.
Well, right.
And it does I mean, it
does seem, in fairness,
right from our
entire conversation,
that the goal of the Trump
administration’s strategy is
not to micromanage
how Harvard,
how Harvard does cancer
research or whatever it is
to change University policy
on hiring and discrimination
and anti-Semitism.
So doesn’t it seem
like that’s true,
that you are picking these
grants as a lever to affect
something unrelated to them.
Having Harvard change its
policies would be great,
but at the same time, if
they don’t, that’s fine.
We’re just not
going to fund it.
And so it’s not like
it’s taking over Harvard.
They sued us.
We didn’t sue them.
It’s not a forced change.
It is actually just that
there’s a portion not even
all.
There is a portion of
Harvard’s grants that we just
decide should go
to somewhere else.
Maybe another University,
maybe Brown, maybe Princeton,
maybe Yale.
I’m just going to express
some skepticism that the Trump
administration has
sat down and said,
we really think that the
University of Kansas Cancer
research program is just
way better than Harvard’s.
And we’re just going
to cut that funding.
It seems like the
administration
is going after going after
the areas where Harvard is,
by general agreement, most
effective and successful,
because that seems
like a useful lever
to change other areas of
administration policy.
But at the end that isn’t
that that’s a naive reading,
a straight A simple reading.
It’s not a full comparison
of all universities across
the nation.
But at the end of the day,
Harvard reacted to a letter
that asked for a few simple
changes with a lawsuit that
basically said, instead of
us showing any amount of good
faith effort to commit
ourselves to the policies that
are important to
the United States,
we’re going to instead say,
we refuse to even answer you.
These are billions
of federal dollars.
And I think that
the funder of that
can ask for a
basic relationship.
All right.
Well, let’s end by
looking at the future.
Imagine it is 2030.
And I guess we well, we
can imagine it’s either
a Democratic or a
Republican administration.
Give me a definition of
success in higher Ed policy.
In 5 in five years and
seven years or eight years,
what does the
landscape look like
if your negotiations with
and pressure on universities
are successful.
So I think universities will
return to a merit mission
and that’ll be in admissions,
that’ll be in hiring,
that’ll be in research.
And so that’ll be with its
relationship to the federal
government, that the federal
government will be funding
institutions that can be
perceived as excellent.
And maybe they’re not today.
Excellent maybe they are
these institutions that
are trying to be excellent,
but that the mission
of universities will
not be diversity.
The mission of universities
won’t be equity,
but they will be excellence.
And that will be rewarded with
a tighter, closer and better
federal relationship.
And so that’s with regard
to the federal government,
I think policies
larger than that,
policies like what’s its
effect in the world and how
does it change our culture.
And my hope is
that the people who
are graduating from
our universities
carry values that will
uplift Western civilization
and our country.
And so that installation
of values is obviously not
something that the federal
government can necessarily
micromanage, but it’s
something that the University
itself can recommit itself
to in determining how can we
prepare our student body to
be true leaders and to advance
our country in ways that
will be better for everybody.
And to the extent that
universities don’t act
collaboratively
with this change.
Do you imagine a landscape
where there really is a kind
of shift in prestige and
where students go, let’s say,
from the Northeast to
the South or Southwest.
Would you imagine a kind of
shaken up US News and World
Report rankings or something
as a possible outcome of all
of this.
So I do think that as
universities decide that they
don’t want a merit seeking
mission that’s not attractive
for parents, that’s not
attractive for students,
and it’s not attractive
for the federal government.
It’s also not
attractive for donors.
And they’ll and they’ll have
to be more out loud about
that.
So that.
So I think that’s the goal is
you can choose who you want
to be.
You want to make no changes.
You want to commit
yourself to victimhood.
You want to oppose
the idea of merit.
Say it out loud so that
students, parents, donors
and the government can know
and that each can dedicate
their resources to those
universities that are
making our country better.
Last question then, from my
perspective can probably sense
this from some of the
questions I’ve asked.
The core weakness to me
of University culture
is a kind of stifling
intellectual conformism.
But that also seems to me
just from watching the Trump
administration in its
battles with universities,
the hardest for
government policy
to address without either
falling afoul of the First
Amendment or getting into
impossible micromanaging.
And it seems to me that a
really shrewd federal strategy
could take you from a world
where 2 percent of the Harvard
faculty are conservatives to
a world where 4 percent are
conservative, right.
And could get you some
slightly more meaningful
intellectual diversity.
But to get beyond
that need as you just
suggested, some kind of
larger cultural shift.
Universities did
not become liberal
because the federal government
told them to become liberal.
They became liberal
because academic culture
moved substantially to the
left in a kind of organic way.
And the same with
student culture.
Can you imagine a
shift in the culture
that would create greater
intellectual diversity
on college campuses.
So if we’re talking about
federal and non-federal
levers, I think a
couple of things.
So one, I think
the same change
that the Federalist
Society has
brought for law schools
could be focused on.
And, I want to take a moment
for Charlie Kirk and Turning
Point, because the quiet loser
of the Republican Party when I
was in college
doesn’t exist now.
I think people are braver now,
and they have community now.
And so you can see a turning
point type organization.
Try and figure out then
how to make professors,
how to bring that energy
into leadership levels.
So think you could do some
conservative organizing
around already
successful groups.
And then I think
just competition.
So President Trump said, he
wanted to take Harvard’s money
and give it to trade schools.
And obviously, you’re not
going to take NIH research
money and give it to the
local cosmetology school.
But I think the
general idea there is
can have a robust
intellectual environment
in a lot of different places.
And it doesn’t have to be the
traditional University model.
So if you just want to learn
about AI or if you want to do
something different and it’s
maybe not your traditional
liberal arts, but you
could having more options
and universities wanting to
still attract those people.
That type of
competition, I think,
will increase the amount
of intellectual diversity
that universities
have to offer.
So continuing to find ways
to provide competition,
I think is also important.
All right.
May Mailman, Thank you
so much for joining me.
Thank you.